Tutorial: Create a Radius application (#736)
radius-project/docs: docs/content/tutorials/new-app/index.md

---
type: docs
title: "Tutorial: Create a Radius application"
linkTitle: "Create an application"
description: "Dive into Radius to learn how to define, deploy, and manage an application"
weight: 100
categories: "Tutorial"
---

This tutorial will walk you through the basics of creating a new Radius application. You will learn how to:

> 1. Define and deploy Radius application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Define and deploy a Radius application
```

> 1. Add a container to your application and customize it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a container to your application and customize that container
```

1. Add a Mongo database to your application and connect it to your container

> 1. Add a second container and connect it to your other container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a second container and connect it to your first container
```

> 1. Expose your application to the internet through a gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Securely expose your application to the internet through a gateway
```

> By the end of the tutorial, you will created and deployed a new Radius application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of the tutorial, you will have created and deployed a new Radius application.
```

<img src="diagram.png" alt="Diagram of the application resources and their connections" width=600px >

## Prerequisites

- [Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref "supported-clusters" >}})
- [rad CLI]({{< ref howto-rad-cli >}})

## Step 1: Initialize a Radius environment

> Radius environments are where applications are deployed, and determine how an application runs on a particular platform. If you don't have one already, initialize a new  environment in your favorite Kubernetes cluster with [`rad init`]({{< ref rad_init >}}):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Radius environments are where applications are deployed. Environments determine how an application runs on a particular platform (like AWS or Azure). If you don't have one already, initialize a new environment in your favorite Kubernetes cluster with [`rad init`]({{< ref rad_init >}}):
```

```bash
rad init
```

## Step 2: Create an application

> Radius applications bring together all your resources into a single understanding of what the app is. This makes it easy to deploy, manage, and delete all the "stuff" that makes up your application. Applications can be defined as part of your infrastructure-as-code (IaC) file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Radius application is an Infrastructure as Code (IaC) file wherein you explicitly define all the resources (containers, gateways, cloud services, etc) that make up your application, including how those resources are connected to each other.  Given this explicit and comprehensive application definition, Radius application files make it simple to consistently deploy and manage your application as a single entity.
```

   ```bash
   rad deploy app.bicep
   ```

   You should see your application resource deployed:

   ```
   Building .\app.bicep...
   Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...

   Deployment In Progress...

   Deployment Complete

   Resources:
       myapp           Applications.Core/applications
   ```

1. View the full application definition by running [`rad app show -o json`]({{< ref rad_application_show >}}):

   ```bash
   rad app show myapp -o json
   ```

   You will see the full application definition in JSON format:
   
   ```
   {
     "id": "/planes/radius/local/resourcegroups/default/providers/Applications.Core/applications/myapp",
     "location": "global",
     "name": "myapp",
     "properties": {
       "environment": "/planes/radius/local/resourceGroups/default/providers/Applications.Core/environments/default",
       "provisioningState": "Succeeded",
       "status": {
         "compute": {
           "kind": "kubernetes",
           "namespace": "default-myapp"
         }
       }
     },
     "systemData": {},
     "tags": {},
     "type": "Applications.Core/applications"
   }
   ```
   

>    There are a couple of things to note about the application definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   There are a few important things to note about the application definition:
```

   1. The `id` property is the fully-qualified UCP resource ID of the application. This value is used to uniquely identify the application in the Radius system.
   1. The `location` property is the location of the application. For now, all applications are deployed to the `global` location.

>    1. The application is part of the 'default' environment. This is the default environment created when you run `rad init`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. The application will be deployed to the 'default' environment, which is created when you run `rad init`.
```

>    1. The `status` property contains `compute` information, which includes where services in the application are to be deployed. In this case, the services are deployed into the `default-myapp` Kubernetes namespace, in the same cluster as the Radius installation.

Reviewer: I see the section numbers are not incrementing. Not sure why that is

>    1. The `status` property contains `compute` information, which includes where services in the application are to be deployed. In this case, the services are deployed into the `default-myapp` Kubernetes namespace, in the same cluster as the Radius installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. The `status` property contains `compute` information, which specifies where services in the application will be deployed. In this case, the services will be deployed into the `default-myapp` Kubernetes namespace (the same cluster where Radius is installed).
```

## Step 3: Create your frontend container

> Now that you have your application defined you can add resources to it. The first resource we'll add is a container. Containers are the basic building block of Radius applications and are where your code runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that your application is defined, you can add resources to it. The first resource we'll add is a container. Containers are the basic building block of Radius applications and are where your code runs.
```

1. Update your `app.bicep` file with a container named `frontend`. Also add an environment variable to customize your container:

   {{% rad file="snippets/app-container.bicep" embed=true marker="//CONTAINER" markdownConfig="{linenos=table,linenostart=13}" %}}

> 1. Run `app.bicep` with [`rad run`]({{< ref rad_run >}}). This will deploy the container, forward logs, and automatically set up port forwarding:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run `app.bicep` with [`rad run`]({{< ref rad_run >}}). This will deploy the container, automatically set up port forwarding, and forward the application log output:
```

   ```bash
   rad run app.bicep --application myapp
   ```

   ```
   Building .\app.bicep...
   Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...
   
   Deployment In Progress...
   
   
   Deployment Complete
   
   Resources:
       myapp           Applications.Core/applications
       frontend        Applications.Core/containers
   
   Starting log stream...
   ```

> 1. Open [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to interact with the frontend container. You should see the container's connections and metadata. Expand the Environment Variables section to see the environment variables you set in the `app.bicep` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to interact with the frontend container you just deployed. You will see the container's connections and metadata. Expand the Environment Variables section to see the environment variables you set in the `app.bicep` file:
```

    <img src="demo-landing.png" alt="Screenshot of the Radius demo container" width=500px >

1. Press CTRL+C to terminate the port-forward and log stream.

## Step 4: Add a dependency and a connection

> Next, you can add a dependency to your container. Dependencies are outside services/infrastructure that your container interacts with, such as a database, cache, message queue, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you can add a dependency to your application. Dependencies are external services or infrastructure your container will interact with, such as a database, cache, message queue, etc.
```

   {{% rad file="snippets/app-mongo.bicep" embed=true marker="//CONTAINER" markdownConfig="{linenos=table,hl_lines=[\"16-20\"],linenostart=13}" %}}

1. Re-run your app with [`rad run`]({{< ref rad_run >}}):

    ```bash
    rad run app.bicep --application myapp
    ```

    ```
    Building .\app.bicep...
    Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...
    
    Deployment In Progress...
    
    
    Deployment Complete
    
    Resources:
        myapp           Applications.Core/applications
        frontend        Applications.Core/containers
        mongodb         Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases
    
    Starting log stream...
    ```

1. Open [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to interact with the frontend container. You should see the container's connections and metadata, this time with a connection to the Mongo database and new environment variables set:

    <img src="demo-landing-connection.png" alt="Screenshot of the Radius demo container" width=500px >

1. Press CTRL+C to terminate the port-forward and log stream.

## Step 5: Add a backend container

> In addition to dependencies, you can also add additional containers to your application which can interact with each other. This is useful for breaking up your application into smaller, more manageable pieces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to dependencies, you can add more containers to make your application code more modular.  Containers can be configured to interact with each other as needed.
```

1. Re-run your app with [`rad run`]({{< ref rad_run >}}):

    ```bash
    rad run app.bicep --application myapp
    ```

    ```
    Building .\app.bicep...
    Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...
    
    Deployment In Progress...
    
    
    Deployment Complete
    
    Resources:
        myapp           Applications.Core/applications
        frontend        Applications.Core/containers
        backend         Applications.Core/containers
        mongodb         Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases
    
    Starting log stream...
    ```

1. Open [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to interact with the frontend container. You should see the container's connections and metadata, this time with a connection to the backend container and new environment variables set:

   <img src="demo-landing-backend.png" alt="Screenshot of the demo container with a connection to the backend container">

    Note the environment variables that are set with connection information for the backend container.

## Step 6: Add a gateway

> Finally, you can add a gateway to your application. Gateways are used to expose your application to the outside world. They can be used to expose a single container or multiple containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you can add a gateway to your application. Gateways are used to expose your application to the internet. They can expose a single container or multiple containers.
```

1. Add a gateway to your `app.bicep` file:

   {{% rad file="snippets/app-gateway.bicep" embed=true marker="//GATEWAY" markdownConfig="{linenos=table,linenostart=63}" %}}

1. Deploy your app with [`rad deploy`]({{< ref rad_deploy >}}):

    ```bash
    rad deploy app.bicep
    ```

    ```
    Building .\app.bicep...
    Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...
    
    Deployment In Progress...
    
    
    Deployment Complete
    
    Resources:
        myapp           Applications.Core/applications
        frontend        Applications.Core/containers
        backend         Applications.Core/containers
        gateway         Applications.Core/gateways
        mongodb         Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases
    
    Public Endpoints:
        gateway         Applications.Core/gateways http://localhost
    ```

> 1. Open the gateway URL in your browser. Unlike before, you are connecting to the gateway instead of the container directly. You should see the same container connections and metadata as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the gateway URL in your browser. Unlike before, you are connecting to the gateway instead of directly to the container. You will see the same container connections and metadata as before.
```

1. Done! You've successfully created your first Radius application.

## Next steps

> Now that you've created your first application you can try out one of the other [tutorials]({{< ref tutorials >}}) or jump into the [user guides]({{< ref guides >}}) to learn more about Radius.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've created your first application, try out more [tutorials]({{< ref tutorials >}}) or jump into the [user guides]({{< ref guides >}}) to learn more about Radius.
```

---
type: docs
title: "Tutorial: Create a Radius Application"

> linkTitle: "Create a new app"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Create a new application"
```

> description: "Dive into Radius to learn how to define, deploy, and manage a new application"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to define, deploy, and manage a new Radius Application"
```

<img src="diagram.png" alt="Diagram of the application resources and their connections" width=600px >

## Prerequisites

- [Supported Kubernetes cluster]({{< ref "/guides/operations/kubernetes/overview" >}})
- [rad CLI]({{< ref "installation#step-1-install-the-rad-cli" >}})
- [Radius Bicep VSCode extension]({{< ref "installation#step-2-install-the-radius-bicep-vs-code-extension" >}})

## Step 1: Initialize a Radius Environment and Application

[Radius Environments]({{< ref "/guides/deploy-apps/environments/overview" >}}) are where applications are deployed. Environments determine how an application runs on a particular platform (_like AWS or Azure_).

1. Begin by creating a new directory for your application:

   ```bash
   mkdir myapp
   cd myapp
   ```

1. Initialize a new Radius Environment with [`rad init`]({{< ref rad_init >}}):
   
   ```bash
   rad init
   ```

   When asked if you want to create a new application select "Yes". This will create a new file named `app.bicep` in your directory where your application will be defined.

   {{< alert title="💡 Development Environments" color="info" >}}

>    By default `rad init` gets you up and running with a development-focused environment where most of the environment configuration is handled for you, including Recipes (_more on that soon_). If you would like to fully    customize your environment, you can run `rad init --full`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   By default `rad init` gets you up and running with a local, development-focused environment where most of the environment configuration is handled for you, including Recipes (_more on that soon_). If you would like to fully customize your environment, you can run `rad init --full`
```

   {{< /alert >}}

## Step 2: Inspect your Application

> Radius Applications are where all your app's resources and relationships come together. Let's take a look at this Radius Application to learn more about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Radius Application files are where all application resources and relationships are defined.  Let's take a look at this Radius Application to learn more about it.
```

1. View the full Application definition by running [`rad app show -o json`]({{< ref rad_application_show >}}):

   ```bash
   rad app show myapp -o json
   ```

   You will see the full App definition in its raw JSON format:
   
   ```
   {
     "id": "/planes/radius/local/resourcegroups/default/providers/Applications.Core/applications/myapp",
     "location": "global",
     "name": "myapp",
     "properties": {
       "environment": "/planes/radius/local/resourceGroups/default/providers/Applications.Core/environments/default",
       "provisioningState": "Succeeded",
       "status": {
         "compute": {
           "kind": "kubernetes",
           "namespace": "default-myapp"
         }
       }
     },
     "systemData": {},
     "tags": {},
     "type": "Applications.Core/applications"
   }
   ```
   
   There are a few important things to note about the application definition:

   - **`id`** is the fully-qualified UCP resource ID of the application. This value is used to uniquely identify the application in the Radius system.

>    - **`location`** is the location of the application. For now, all applications are deployed to the `global` location.

Reviewer: This is circular, so does not tell me what location means.  Does location mean the geographic location (a given Azure region, for example) where the app will ultimately be deployed?  What does global mean in this context ?

Author: Haha good catch

```suggestion
   - **`location`** is the _where_ your Application resides. For now, all applications are deployed to the `global` location, which corresponds to the cluster where Radius is running.
```

>    - **`environment`** specifies where the application will be deployed. In this case, the application will be deployed into the `default` environment that was created by `rad init`.

Reviewer: It would help to more clearly distinguish the definition of both location and environment.

Author: ```suggestion
   - **`environment`** specifies the Radius Environment which the Applications "binds" to at deployment. This is what determines where containers should run (_Kubernetes_) and which namespace to deploy into (_prefixed with "default"_). In this case, the application will be deployed into the `default` Environment that was created by `rad init`.
```

>    - **`compute`** specifies where running services in the Application will be deployed. In this case, the services will be deployed into the `default-myapp` Kubernetes namespace within the same cluster where Radius is installed.

Reviewer: Location, environment, compute all refer to some aspect of "where" but it is not clear the difference between the three terms / concepts

Author: ```suggestion
   - **`compute`** specifies the hosting platform where running services in the Application will run. In this case, the services will be deployed into the `default-myapp` Kubernetes namespace within the same cluster where Radius is installed.
```

1. Let's take a look inside the Application to see what's deployed. Run [`rad app connections`]({{< ref rad_application_connections >}}) to print the Application's resources and relationships:

   ```bash
   rad app connections
   ```

   You'll see that nothing has been deployed yet and the app is empty:

   ```
   Displaying application: myapp
   
   (empty)
   ```

   Let's deploy some resources to start building out the application.

## Step 3: Inspect and deploy `app.bicep`

> `app.bicep` will contain all the resources (containers, gateways, cloud services, etc) that make up your application, including how those resources are connected to each other. Given this explicit and comprehensive application definition, Radius Application files make it simple to consistently deploy and manage your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`app.bicep` will define all the resources (containers, gateways, cloud services, etc) that make up your application, including how those resources are connected to each other. Given this explicit and comprehensive application definition, Radius Application files make it simple to consistently deploy and manage your application.
```

   {{% rad file="snippets/1-app.bicep" embed=true %}}

1. Deploy `app.bicep` with [`rad deploy`]({{< ref rad_deploy >}}):

   ```bash
   rad deploy app.bicep
   ```

   You should see your container deployed:

   ```
   Building .\app.bicep...
   Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...

   Deployment In Progress...

   Deployment Complete

   Resources:
       demo            Applications.Core/containers
   ```

1. Run `rad app connections` again to see the container you just deployed:

    ```bash
    rad app connections
    ```
    
    You should see the container you just deployed, along with the underlying Kubernetes resources that were created to run it:
    
    ```
    Displaying application: myapp
   
   Name: demo (Applications.Core/containers)
   Connections: (none)
   Resources:
     demo (kubernetes: apps/Deployment)
     demo (kubernetes: core/Service)
     demo (kubernetes: core/ServiceAccount)
     demo (kubernetes: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/Role)
     demo (kubernetes: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/RoleBinding)
    ```

   {{< alert title="💡 Kubernetes mapping" color="info" >}}

>    Radius Environments map how Applications "bind" to a particular platform. Earlier we saw that the Application compute was set to `kubernetes` and the namespace was set to `default-myapp`. This means that the container resources were deployed to the `default-myapp` namespace in the Kubernetes cluster where Radius is installed. Visit the [Kubernetes mapping docs]({{< ref "/guides/operations/kubernetes/overview#resource-mapping" >}}) to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Radius Environments map how Applications "bind" to a particular platform. Earlier we saw the Application compute was set to `kubernetes` and the namespace was set to `default-myapp`. This means the container resources were deployed to the `default-myapp` namespace in the Kubernetes cluster where Radius is installed. Visit the [Kubernetes mapping docs]({{< ref "/guides/operations/kubernetes/overview#resource-mapping" >}}) to learn more.
```

Deployment In Progress...

..                   demo            Applications.Core/containers

Deployment Complete

Resources:
    demo            Applications.Core/containers

Starting log stream...

demo-bb9df8798-b68rc › demo
demo-bb9df8798-b68rc demo Using in-memory store: no connection string found
demo-bb9df8798-b68rc demo Server is running at http://localhost:3000
demo-bb9df8798-b68rc demo [port-forward] connected from localhost:3000 -> ::3000
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to view the Radius demo container:

<img src="demo-landing.png" alt="Screenshot of the Radius demo container" width=500px >

When you're done press `CTRL + c` to terminate the port-forward and log stream.

## Step 5: Add a database and a connection

In addition to containers, you can add dependencies like Redis caches, Dapr State Stores, Mongo databases, and more.

1. Add a Mongo database and an environment parameter to your `app.bicep` file:

   {{% rad file="snippets/2-app-mongo.bicep" embed=true marker="//MONGO" %}}

   {{< alert title="💡 Radius Recipes" color="info" >}}

>    When you added a Mongo database to your application you didn't need to specify _how or where_ to run the underlying infrastructure. The Radius Environment and its Recipes take care of that for you. Just like how the Radius Environment bound your container to a Kubernetes cluster, it also deploys and binds your Mongo database to underlying infrastructure using [Recipes]({{< ref "/guides/recipes/overview" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note that when you added the Mongo database to your application you didn't need to specify _how or where_ to run the underlying infrastructure. The Radius Environment and its Recipes take care of that for you. Just like how the Radius Environment bound your container to a Kubernetes cluster, it also deploys and binds your Mongo database to underlying infrastructure using [Recipes]({{< ref "/guides/recipes/overview" >}}).
```

   {{< /alert >}}

1. To learn about the underlying Recipe that will deploy and manage the Mongo infrastructure run [`rad recipe show`]({{< ref rad_recipe_show >}}):

   ```bash
   rad recipe show default --resource-type Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases
   ```
   
   You'll see details on the Recipe, including available parameters and defaults:

   ```
   NAME      TYPE                                    TEMPLATE KIND  TEMPLATE VERSION  TEMPLATE
   default   Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases  bicep                            radius.azurecr.io/recipes/local-dev/mongodatabases:latest
   
   PARAMETER NAME  TYPE          DEFAULT VALUE   MIN       MAX
   username        string        admin           -         -
   password        secureString  Password1234==  -         -
   database        string                        -         -
   ```

   If you want to learn more about the Recipe template it's in the [Recipes repo](https://github.com/radius-project/recipes/blob/main/local-dev/mongodatabases.bicep).

> 1. Add a connection from your container to the Mongo database to tell Radius that your container needs to communicate with the Mongo database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a connection from your container to the Mongo database, which indicates to Radius that your container needs to communicate with the Mongo database:
```

   {{% rad file="snippets/2-app-mongo.bicep" embed=true marker="//CONTAINER" markdownConfig="{hl_lines=[\"16-20\"]}" %}}

   {{< alert title="💡 Radius Connections" color="info" >}}

>    Radius Connections are more than just bookkeeping. They are used to automatically configure access and connection information for your containers. Learn more in the [containers documentation]({{< ref "/guides/author-apps/containers/overview" >}}).

Reviewer: Capitalization should be consistent for Connection.

Author: ```suggestion
   Radius Connections are more than just bookkeeping. They are used to automatically configure access for your containers. Learn more in the [containers documentation]({{< ref "/guides/author-apps/containers/overview" >}}).
```

   {{< /alert >}}

1. Re-run your app with [`rad run`]({{< ref rad_run >}}) to deploy the Mongo database and container and start the port-forward and log stream:

    ```bash
    rad run app.bicep
    ```

    ```
    Building .\app.bicep...
    Deploying template '.\app.bicep' for application 'myapp' and environment 'default' from workspace 'default'...
    
    Deployment In Progress...
    
    
    Deployment Complete
    
    Resources:
        myapp           Applications.Core/applications
        frontend        Applications.Core/containers
        mongodb         Applications.Datastores/mongoDatabases
    
    Starting log stream...
    ```

1. Open [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to interact with the frontend container. You should see the container's connections and metadata, this time with a connection to the Mongo database and new environment variables set:

    <img src="demo-landing-connection.png" alt="Screenshot of the Radius demo container" width=500px >

1. Press CTRL+C to terminate the port-forward and log stream.

1. Run `rad app connections` again to see the new dependency:

    ```bash
    rad app connections
    ```
    

>     You should see the container you just deployed, along with the underlying Kubernetes resources that were created to run it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You should see the container you just deployed, along with the underlying Kubernetes resources that were created to run it, plus the Mongo database you added:
```

Author: ```suggestion
    You should see the container and Mongo database you just deployed, along with the underlying Kubernetes resources that were created to run them:
```
